I'm Vicki MacDonald. I'm in Holy Trinity Church, Fandedno, as part of the Longest Yarn.
I'm speaking to Sian Bradshaw and she's going to tell me about her memories of her father's war service.
Thank you, Sian.
Hi. My dad was called Thomas Kirkman Bradshaw and he was brought up in Chester, but he spent quite a lot of time in Wales.
He was recruited into the RAF towards the end of the war and went over to do his training and then much of the flying that they did in Australia and in Hong Kong and the bases there.
He spent most of the time that he was flying in places like Japan and other Far East countries.
Unfortunately, I can't remember the names of them all, but I know that on one occasion my dad was quite pleased because they'd flown into one island, and I say I can't remember which it is, and they were the first allied troops to arrive or allied service people to arrive.
He says, so when they got out of their planes, they were all greeted by heroes, by apparently these gorgeous women who threw garlands of flowers around their necks and sort of hailed them as their conquering heroes who they loved.
But the unpleasant part about it was because it was towards the end of the war, most of what my father was doing, he was flying Wellington planes.
I'd never heard of a Wellington plane before, and Dakotas, but they were, sadly, flying back the dead bodies of soldiers from the war, which he said was a really unpleasant task, A, loading them up, and then flying them back, he said, unfortunately, the smell was so bad that they had to have the windows on the plane open as they were flying because it was so unpleasant.
But, you know, that's what he is. I'm trying to think of anything else, and I can't specifically think.
So after the war, did he carry on as a pilot? Did he become a private pilot?
No, he didn't. He left and became a civil servant, actually, so very far and removed from that in Liverpool, which is where he met and married my mum.
Which was bombed out, of course, Liverpool.
Yes, Liverpool.
No, your mum was.
My mum was, yeah, but that's another one. My mum was one evening was in a church, and they were in the basement of the church because there was a bombing raid going on in Liverpool.
They were singing, and they were very fortunate because they were rehearsing some singing, and the bombing completely destroyed the church, and the people in the other side of the church were all killed.
Mum and her friends in the choir were caught in the cellar, which was filling with water, and they were having to swim around and then hold themselves up.
And then very, very fortunately, before they drowned, they were all rescued. So, you know, that's quite an unpleasant thing to happen as well.
So did your mother tell you that story?
She did, and she always said, I mean, I'm one of seven children, and all of us are very, very poor swimmers because my mum had this almost natural fear of water.
It must have been terrifying.
It did influence her, I think, a lot, yes, sadly.
Mum then was evacuated, along with a lot of her school friends, to Holywell.
Holywell, was it? Holywell?
Yeah, it was, wasn't it?
Holywell, she was with another girl, was with a farming family who, you know, they had a lovely time with, and they were safe.
And then I think my grandma moved over as well so that she could be here.
And then mum and her brothers all went back with grandma.
Yes, it wasn't the easiest time for any of them, was it?
It was quite horrendous, really. I mean, I can't imagine what it must be like as a child to be taken away from your parents, to go and live with complete and utter strangers,
while you know that your parents are being bombed back home.
And they're in danger.
Yeah, and never knowing whether you're going to see them again.
It must have been quite horrendous.
Thank you, child, very much. Thank you.